# Case 3: Pricey Pill To Swallow

### See the costs to Medicare <a href="#" target="_blank">here</a>!

In June 2018, [NBC News reported](https://www.nbcnews.com/business/business-news/medicare-spending-name-brand-drugs-rose-77-percent-over-five-n880096) that Medicare was spending 77% more money on name-brand pharmaceuticals as compared to five years ago, despite the fact that these medications were being purchased at lower rates. They attribute this change to an increase in the prices of these medications, which is paradoxical given that many have generics available. This may represent a significant cost-burden on the Medicare system, preventing spending on other valuable interventions.

The article cites a report from the Office of the Inspector General suggesting that "brand-name insulin, cholesterol medication, and inhalers" were costing patients the most, particularly given that they are used to manage chronic health issues. Just how much more do these brand-name medications cost the Medicare system as compared to generics? We can find out using EconoMed.

Let's use Statins, a class of drugs used to inhibit the HMG-CoA reductase enzyme in order to treat hypercholesterolemia, as an example. A number of statins are avaible, many of which have humungous price differences between brand-name medications and their generic counterparts. Zocor, for instance, is a brand-name formulation of Simvastatin. How much more do you think Zocor costs Medicare compared to the generic?

You might be surprised to hear that the cost per dosage unit is around 42x more for Zocor, according to the [EconoMed price data](https://jpoles1.github.io/economed/?locale=MANHATTAN%2C%20NY&outpatient=&inpatient=&pharma=Simvastatin%2CZocor%20-%20Simvastatin). How about for atorvastatin calcium, commonly known by the brand-name Lipitor? Buying the brand name atorvasatatin will cost Medicare about 30x more per dosage unit according to [EconoMed](https://jpoles1.github.io/economed//?locale=MANHATTAN%2C%20NY&outpatient=&inpatient=&pharma=Lipitor%20-%20Atorvastatin%20Calcium%2CAtorvastatin%20Calcium). Altoprev, the brand-name formulation of lovastatin will cost a staggering 111x greater cost to Medicare compared to the generic dosage unit according to [EconoMed](https://jpoles1.github.io/economed/?locale=MANHATTAN%2C%20NY&outpatient=&inpatient=&pharma=Lovastatin%2CAltoprev%20-%20Lovastatin).

Even when generics aren't available, different brand-name formulations are available at a variety of pricings. For albuterol sulfate, three brand-name aerosole inhalers are available. [EconoMed price data](https://jpoles1.github.io/economed/?locale=MANHATTAN%2C%20NY&outpatient=&inpatient=&pharma=Ventolin%20HFA%20-%20Albuterol%20Sulfate%2CProair%20HFA%20-%20Albuterol%20Sulfate%2CProventil%20HFA%20-%20Albuterol%20Sulfate) shows that the cheapest inhaler costing 2-3.5x less than the alternatives. This despite the fact that the cheapest inhaler has a dosage counter, while the others do not, an important feature for users. That said, the makers of the 2nd most expensive device, the ProAir HFA [claim that](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22191397) their dosage delivery is superior. It is important to recognize that not all medications with the same active ingredient perform identically, particularly when delivery devices are involved as with inhalers. 